README.adoc, before:

= OpenAPI Playground
Álvaro López Medina <alopezme@redhat.com>
v1.0, 2022-12
// Metadata
:description: This repository showcases how to create example applications based on an OpenAPI definition.
:keywords: openapi, api-first, playground, red hat
// Create TOC wherever needed
:toc: macro
:sectanchors:
:sectnumlevels: 2
:sectnums: 
:source-highlighter: pygments
:imagesdir: images
:pdf-theme: custom
:pdf-themesdir: {docdir}  
// Start: Enable admonition icons
ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]
ifndef::env-github[]
:icons: font
endif::[]
// End: Enable admonition icons
// Create the Table of contents here
toc::[]


== Introduction

This repository showcases how to create example applications based on an OpenAPI definition and provides a learning path for developers that want to get started with this game changer development approach.

== Concepts

=== What is *OpenAPI*?

The OpenAPI Specification (OAS) - formerly known as Swagger - defines a standard, language-agnostic interface to RESTful APIs which allows both humans and computers to discover and understand the capabilities of the service without access to source code, documentation, or through network traffic inspection. When properly defined, a consumer can understand and interact with the remote service with a minimal amount of implementation logic.

=== What is *API-first*?

An API-first approach means that for any given development project, your APIs are treated as "first-class citizens". Everything about a project revolves around the idea that the end product will be consumed by mobile devices, and that APIs will be consumed by client applications.

This development approach provides several benefits:

* Development teams can work in parallel.
* Reduces the cost of developing apps.
* Increases the speed to market.

=== What is *Apicurito*?

Apicurito is the OpenAPI editor found in Studio and repackaged as a simple standalone web application. It has no back-end component at all, which makes it incredibly easy to package, deploy, and use.


== Writing the OpenAPI specification

Many tools can simplify the process of generating your first OpenAPI definition. Here I will list several tools that you can use depending on your needs:

* The easiest tool is the https://editor-next.swagger.io/[Swagger Editor] for OpenAPI.
** *Swagger Editor* offers an easy way to get started with the OpenAPI Specification, as well as the AsyncAPI specification.
* However, if you want to generate the schemas, store them in an OpenAPI schema registry and then use them inside the Red Hat ecosystem in an integrated and simplified way, you will love the https://console.redhat.com/application-services/api-designer/[Red Hat's API Designer].
** *API Designer* is a tool to design your APIs (OpenAPI, AsyncAPI) and schemas (Apache Avro, Google Protobuf, JSON Schema). Manage your collection of API and schema designs by creating, importing, and editing. Save your work by downloading your designs locally or by exporting them to OpenShift Service Registry.
* Finally, many companies don't want to rely on managed cloud services to design and store their API definitions. In that case, Red Hat also provides an https://github.com/Apicurio/apicurio-operators/tree/master/apicurito[on-premise version of `API Designer`] based on the Apicurito open-source project.
** https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openshift_api_designer/1[*Red Hat Integration - API Designer*] is the operator for installing Apicurito, a small/minimal version of Apicurio used for standalone editing of API designs on Openshift.


== Auto-generating code



== Apicurito on Openshift

You can install Apicurito on Openshift using the official operator. Just go to the OperatorHub, select the `Red Hat Integration - API Designer` operator and install it:

.Apicurito Operator
image::ocp-apicurito-operator.png["Apicurito Operator",width=70%]

Then, create an Apicurito CR to deploy Apicurito:

[source, yaml]
----
kind: Apicurito
apiVersion: apicur.io/v1
metadata:
  name: apicurito-service
spec:
  size: 2
----

After a few seconds, you will be able to access Apicurito using the following Route:

[source, bash]
----
oc get route apicurito-service-ui
----



== swagger-codegen vs openapi-generator

The OpenAPI ecosystem has been quite messy as two organizations are working on this topic: Swagger and OpenAPI. `Swagger Codegen` is driven by SmartBear while OpenAPI Generator is driven by the community. 

Also, comparing them on OpenHub, you can compare the activity in both projects: 

* https://www.openhub.net/p/openapi-generator[OpenAPI Generator].
* https://www.openhub.net/p/swagger-codegen[Swagger Codegen].

As of today, OpenAPI has doubled the contributors and almost doubled the commits. Considering that `OpenAPI Generator` began as a fork of `Swagger Codegen`, it is clear that the best alternative today (January 2023) is to use the *OpenAPI Generator*. That's why this project is focused on this tool.


* Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=19947817[Message from William Cheng], core team and founding member of OpenAPI Generator.
* Source: https://openapi-generator.tech/docs/faq/#what-is-the-difference-between-swagger-codegen-and-openapi-generator[What is the difference between Swagger Codegen and OpenAPI Generator?].

== Relevant links

Commit message:

:memo: Docs to generate code

README.adoc, after:

= OpenAPI Playground
Álvaro López Medina <alopezme@redhat.com>
v1.0, 2022-12
// Metadata
:description: This repository showcases how to create example applications based on an OpenAPI definition.
:keywords: openapi, api-first, playground, red hat
// Create TOC wherever needed
:toc: macro
:sectanchors:
:sectnumlevels: 2
:sectnums: 
:source-highlighter: pygments
:imagesdir: images
:pdf-theme: custom
:pdf-themesdir: {docdir}  
// Start: Enable admonition icons
ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]
ifndef::env-github[]
:icons: font
endif::[]
// End: Enable admonition icons
// Create the Table of contents here
toc::[]


== Introduction

This repository showcases how to create example applications based on an OpenAPI definition and provides a learning path for developers that want to get started with this game changer development approach.

== Concepts

=== What is *OpenAPI*?

The OpenAPI Specification (OAS) - formerly known as Swagger - defines a standard, language-agnostic interface to RESTful APIs which allows both humans and computers to discover and understand the capabilities of the service without access to source code, documentation, or through network traffic inspection. When properly defined, a consumer can understand and interact with the remote service with a minimal amount of implementation logic.

=== What is *API-first*?

An API-first approach means that for any given development project, your APIs are treated as "first-class citizens". Everything about a project revolves around the idea that the end product will be consumed by mobile devices, and that APIs will be consumed by client applications.

This development approach provides several benefits:

* Development teams can work in parallel.
* Reduces the cost of developing apps.
* Increases the speed to market.

=== What is *Apicurito*?

Apicurito is the OpenAPI editor found in Studio and repackaged as a simple standalone web application. It has no back-end component at all, which makes it incredibly easy to package, deploy, and use.


== Writing the OpenAPI specification

Many tools can simplify the process of generating your first OpenAPI definition. Here I will list several tools that you can use depending on your needs:

* The easiest tool is the https://editor-next.swagger.io/[Swagger Editor] for OpenAPI.
** *Swagger Editor* offers an easy way to get started with the OpenAPI Specification, as well as the AsyncAPI specification.
* However, if you want to generate the schemas, store them in an OpenAPI schema registry and then use them inside the Red Hat ecosystem in an integrated and simplified way, you will love the https://console.redhat.com/application-services/api-designer/[Red Hat's API Designer].
** *API Designer* is a tool to design your APIs (OpenAPI, AsyncAPI) and schemas (Apache Avro, Google Protobuf, JSON Schema). Manage your collection of API and schema designs by creating, importing, and editing. Save your work by downloading your designs locally or by exporting them to OpenShift Service Registry.
* Finally, many companies don't want to rely on managed cloud services to design and store their API definitions. In that case, Red Hat also provides an https://github.com/Apicurio/apicurio-operators/tree/master/apicurito[on-premise version of `API Designer`] based on the Apicurito open-source project.
** https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openshift_api_designer/1[*Red Hat Integration - API Designer*] is the operator for installing Apicurito, a small/minimal version of Apicurio used for standalone editing of API designs on Openshift.


== Auto-generating code

To autogenerate server code based on OpenAPI, we are going to use the https://openapi-generator.tech/[OpenAPI Generator].

Several examples of OpenAPI specifications are stored in the `specifications` folder. I recommend you begin using the `petstore`, which is an https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openapitools/openapi-generator/master/modules/openapi-generator/src/test/resources/3_0/petstore.yaml[official example].

There are several ways to install the generator, but I recommend the containerized alternative. Run the following command and you will have the server code in the `out` folder.

[source, bash]
----
podman run --rm \
    -v $PWD:/tmp/openapi/ \
    --security-opt label=disable \
    docker.io/openapitools/openapi-generator-cli:latest generate \
    -i /tmp/openapi/specifications/petstore.yaml \
    -g go \
    -o /tmp/openapi/out/go
----



== Apicurito on Openshift

You can install Apicurito on Openshift using the official operator. Just go to the OperatorHub, select the `Red Hat Integration - API Designer` operator and install it:

.Apicurito Operator
image::ocp-apicurito-operator.png["Apicurito Operator",width=70%]

Then, create an Apicurito CR to deploy Apicurito:

[source, yaml]
----
kind: Apicurito
apiVersion: apicur.io/v1
metadata:
  name: apicurito-service
spec:
  size: 2
----

After a few seconds, you will be able to access Apicurito using the following Route:

[source, bash]
----
oc get route apicurito-service-ui
----



== swagger-codegen vs openapi-generator

The OpenAPI ecosystem has been quite messy as two organizations are working on this topic: Swagger and OpenAPI. `Swagger Codegen` is driven by SmartBear while OpenAPI Generator is driven by the community. 

Also, comparing them on OpenHub, you can compare the activity in both projects: 

* https://www.openhub.net/p/openapi-generator[OpenAPI Generator].
* https://www.openhub.net/p/swagger-codegen[Swagger Codegen].

As of today, OpenAPI has doubled the contributors and almost doubled the commits. Considering that `OpenAPI Generator` began as a fork of `Swagger Codegen`, it is clear that the best alternative today (January 2023) is to use the *OpenAPI Generator*. That's why this project is focused on this tool.


* Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=19947817[Message from William Cheng], core team and founding member of OpenAPI Generator.
* Source: https://openapi-generator.tech/docs/faq/#what-is-the-difference-between-swagger-codegen-and-openapi-generator[What is the difference between Swagger Codegen and OpenAPI Generator?].

== Relevant links
